Administration of an institution.
From the inside.
Mr Rudder was still president in those years.
And I was able to.
Increase I was able to see his leadership
qualities. Close up.
One of my primary tasks was to review all masters
and doctoral thesis proposals.
That service broadened my understanding
and introduced me to a
broader variety of scholars and their research
techniques.
I literally read the proposals and often offered
suggestions for improvement. Similarly, I
appointed the graduate council representatives
on all doctoral committees
and used the technique of marking each appointees
name in the graduate catalog and trying to select
individuals from all across the campus to serve on
doctoral programs in a discipline far removed
from theirs. A task in which they were expected to
report to Dr. Hall regarding the appropriate
quality
and thoroughness of the
candidate's examination,
preliminary and final examinations as well as the
dissertation.
When I appointed myself to one of those
committees,
I soon developed a pair of standard questions to
ask the candidate while I watched the members
of the committee
who were from the student's major department. One
of the questions was to inquire, quote, if you had
known at the time you began your graduate studies
all that you know now about the quality of the
programs in your
area of specialization.
to what institutions would you have applied for
admission other than Texas A&M and why would you
have been interested in those programs or in other
words what are the outstanding programs in your
specialty
period quote
the other question
was directed at
learning the student's acquaintance with the
areas of publication in the specialty.
So there I asked,
quote, in order to obtain the highest scholarly
acclaim
and benefit for your
scholarly reputation,
to what journal will you send perhaps a chapter of
your dissertation? For public journal or
journals, will you send portions of your
dissertation And to what press, either
profit-making or university-related, will you
send the manuscript in the hope that they will
accept it as a book?"
One day, after
I served I believe a year and a half, Bill Barzac
told me that one day after coffee that he thought he
was going to resign his position and go back to
English. That administration quote really
wasn't his cup of tea, period quote. That
afternoon, Dr. Hall invited me in and then
inquired about my interest in serving as the
associate dean of the graduate school on a
full-time basis.
I responded by asking him if there was any plan in
the future to select a full-time dean of the
graduate school since he was serving as both Vice
President of Academic Affairs and Graduate
Dean. When he responded that he thought that might
happen within a year, I was encouraged,
but continued with the inquiry About whether or
not quote anyone. From liberal arts. Would be
considered for that position. Period quote. My
hopes were dashed when he indicate when he. Told me
that. There had already been a decision made. But
the new graduate Dean would come from
agriculture. So I told him I should not, I did not
want to
remain in the subordinate position.
George Kunze was soon announced as the new
graduate dean, and Dr. Hall asked me if I would stay
for a year to work with Dr. Kunze, which I did, and
from which I benefited in terms of experience
greatly. Paragraph.
So it was an old friend who called me one afternoon
in the fall of 1970 to
ask if I was acquainted with Jack McKinney
Williams a Southern historian who had gotten his
PhD at Emory University in Atlanta, who had just
been selected as president of Texas A&M
University.
I told him that I knew who Dr. Williams was and that
possibly we had shaken hands a time or two at the
Southern Historical Association Convention,
but that I did not know him well. except to have
heard very positive things about Dr. Williams,
both as a historian and a leader of Texas higher
education during his days as commissioner.
Paragraph, the next step
in life-changing events came soon after Dr.
Williams arrived
When I read a note,
a brief note
from the new president, which informed me that one
of the last things that he had done before leaving
Knoxville was to chat with his doctoral
dissertation advisor, Bell Wiley.
who had been one of our advisory editors with the
Jeff Davis Project
and whom I knew as one of the finest
historians and friends I would ever meet.
The note from Dr. Williams informed me that Dr.
Wiley had told him that when he got to College
Station, if he, quote, wanted to talk to a faculty
member who seemed well acquainted all across the
campus
and might be a source for information about
the faculty and their goals, that he should talk
with Haskell Munroe. period quote. Thus, Dr.
Williams asked me to call his secretary, Nelda,
and come over for a visit.
When I called that always reliable, careful, and
caring lady, she gave me an appointment at 4.45 in
the afternoon, which I thought was a hint at a brief
and comparatively meaningless chat.
That expectation
was forever erased
when we finished our delightful visit At least two
hours after it began. As
I was about to walk out the doorway, Doctor
Williams put his hand on my shoulder. And asked me
if I would quote ever be interested. In serving as a
member of the A&M administration period quote.
Without much. Preparation. I responded. But I had
not mentioned it to anybody else, but that yes, I
thought I would.
Meanwhile.
More changes were underway.
Because Jack Williams. came with broad academic
experience and insight and was able to build
a lofty structure,
a lofty institutional structure on the strong and
solid foundation which only Earl Rudder could
have built.
In hindsight, the Rudder Williams years became
Camelot on the brasses.
Only Earl Rudder could have done what he did.
And only Jack Williams could have done what he did.
Neither could have accomplished the other's
victories.
And both were uniquely prepared
for their time and place.
Jack Williams had marvelous personal qualities
as a speaker, as a public speaker,
An individual with. Strong connections. In
Austin and in Washington. Especially with the
federal. Agencies relating to our education.
His record of assisting. The separate the.
Historically black. Land-grant schools in the
South. was little known but truly important.
Also during those years
the president of Texas A&M was also the president
of the A&M system. Thus there was no contention in
almost all of Mr. Rutter's years
and William's time until 1976
over where the experiment stations and extension
services, other state agencies reported. There
was one chief executive officer and everyone knew
it.
Horace Byers had replaced Wayne Hall as Vice
President for Academic Affairs. Dr. Byers, a
nationally and internationally known scholar in
the geosciences, came from the University of
Chicago and increased the pace of progress which
Wayne Hall had begun. He retired not long after Dr.
Williams' arrival
and was replaced by John C. Calhoun, Jr.,
a marvelously
skillful leader with truly unique capability.
A native of Pennsylvania, Dr. Calhoun
had begun his studies at what was then the
Pennsylvania State College in petroleum
engineering
and soon after completion of his doctoral studies
earned worldwide recognition as a truly
innovative and creative
thinker regarding oil
regarding petroleum location, exploration, and
recovery. He had come to A&M in the 1950s as dean of
engineering, had served in the Kennedy
administration as science advisor to the
Secretary of Interior,
And thus he too brought broad scope to the
administration.
All of that began to link to me.
And near the end of 19... 71 and the beginning of
1972. That
first year of Dr. Williams had been marked by a
change, by an enormous increase in enrollment of
coeds because he had
informed the board of directors that he would not
accept their invitation
to come to College Station as president of A&M
unless they would allow
him to create a woman's dormitory.
When they assured him they would back his
selection of an architect, And planning to build
such a structure.
He noted that he wanted them to approve his
identification.
As he began. His service on November 1, 1970. Have a
an existing dormitory. To be reserved for women
only.
when the spring semester began in 1971.
As word of that decision spread, women filled that
dormitory
and everyone became aware that there were no
hindrances to women's enrollment at A&M in any
manner.
Almost exactly a year later,
I came to my office in Nagel Hall
after returning from North Carolina with Joe
and our children.
Among the notes in my box was a request that I return
a phone call to the office of Vice President
Calhoun.
A gentleman with whom I had little, if any,
personal acquaintance.
The secretary. responded to my call by indicating
that Dr Calhoun had been trying
without success to reach me for a number of days.
She accepted my explanation of the absence when I
told her that we had been in North Carolina because
of my wife's stepfather's death and burial, and
then remained
for Christmas there with her mother.
She indicated that Dr. Calhoun wanted to speak to
me as soon as I could come over, so I asked what was
the nature of his concern.
With obvious, with a bit of awkwardness, she noted
that she was unaware of the reason for his
concern
and that usually he
informed her regarding
the nature of important calls.
So as I walked to the Teague building
on the east end of the campus, I wondered what the
vice president of academic affairs
might ask me to do. Much to my surprise, he invited
me to join his staff with the title Assistant Vice
President for Academic Affairs.
In that position, I would join him and the
Associate Vice President, Dr. Richard E.
Winerdi, W-A-I-N-E-R-D-I,
a marvelously talented and always energetic
member of the petroleum engineering faculty
who had studied with Dr. Calhoun first at the
University of Oklahoma and then completed his
doctoral work with Calhoun back at Penn State.
I asked Dr. Calhoun about my role. For example, did
he want me to be particularly responsible for
reviewing matters from the humanities, social
sciences, business, education areas?
He quickly explained
that no, that instead of dividing the task up that
way, the three of us would be a team working on all
tasks together. I asked him if I could continue to
teach a survey course.
And he smiled, adding, of course, if you would like
to do so, but we cannot give you extra compensation
for that effort.
Thus, I continued
the plan to teach every semester
and could begin to honestly state that my
compensation for that teaching was in my heart,
not my hip pocket.
That service began January of 1942.
and allowed
me to learn
a broad view of all campus efforts. Teaching,
research, service, committees, coordinating
board, relation to former students, the general
public, the legislature, public affairs,
athletics, fundraising,
and student leadership.
For anyone who would later serve as a campus-wide
administrator, working with John Calhoun
was the most important and valuable preparation
that anyone could have. And now, as I am on Deacon
Drive, a block and a half from the house, we will
terminate this part of this analysis.